
THE OLD DUELLING GROUND OF NEW ORLEANS; 

THE OAKS 

BY JOHN AUGUSTIN 

[From an article written by the author in 1887 for one of the newspapers of the 
Crescent City and reproduced in 'The Louisiana Book,' 1894. Copyright, Thomas 
McCaleb. It recalls some of the most thrilling tragedies in the history of the Creole 
State, and its charm of style no less than its piquancy of interest, makes it a classic 
of literature. See Vol. XV, p. 13 for a sketch of the author, who was both a writer 
of Attic prose and a poet of exceptional gifts.] 

Under the wide-spreading oaks of ancient Gaul, the 
consecrated Druids, with golden sickle, cut the holy mistletoe with 
which they sanctified their foreheads in the stern celebration of 
their rites of blood. Happy was the victim offered in sacrifice; 
for to die was to know, and to go forward knowing, in that  
eternity of progressive development and bliss which ended in the 
perfection of knowledge. It also meant the sublime identification 
 with nature on some ultimate star, radiant with omniscience 
and musical with the rythmic pulsations of eternal peace. 

I cannot sit of a calm evening under the pensive oaks, 
from whose gray beards, waving under the sway of the 
breeze, comes a murmur as of a prayer and prophecy, without 
reverting to that stern yet hopeless creed of Runic times, 
which held knowledge to be the supreme good, and pointed 
to sacrificial death as the first step to its acquirement. 

It is curious that rites of blood should have been the 
foundation of every religion. Even the meek and divine 
Jesus found it necessary to die on the cross that humanity 
might be saved. There is a problem full of yet un fathomed 
meaning in this perpetual theory of blood atonement. Else 
why the traditional sanctity of war and the undying fame 
which attaches to successful military chieftains, loftier than 
the apotheosis of saints? Why the glamour around the 
heroes of knight-errantry, riding alone and full-armed in 
search of blood to spill for the redressing of wrong? Why 
the trial by single combat, introduced by Holy Church and 
but recently fallen into disfavor? 

****** 

Where the Metaire ridge, slightly undulating, barely 
breaks the monotonous flatness of the hazy landscape, standing 



near the dilapidated tomb of Louis Allard, such thoughts 
crossed the mind of the writer as he gradually became  
enveloped in the dark shadows which the rays of the setting 
sun slanted from the oaks of the Lower City Park. These 
oaks were formerly known as the "Chenes d'Allard" otherwise 
called the "Metaire oaks." These, also, in their time, 
witnessed rites of blood, and lent their protecting shade to 
many a preconcerted, solemn and deadly encounter between 
man and man. 

From the terminus of the Bayou Road street car line in 
New Orleans, at the foot of Esplanade Street, after crossing 
the bridge over Bayou St. John, a short walk brings the  
visitor in front of a magnificent little forest of gigantic live oaks. 
It is the lower City Park, in former days a wooded plantation 
belonging to Louis Allard. 

This gentleman, who was a man of letters and a poet, 
owned all that tract of land extending from the Bayou St. 
John to the Orleans Canal, and from the Metaire Road to 
the old toll-gate. That portion of it which is now called the 
Lower City Park was purchased previous to his death by the 
millionaire philanthropist, John McDonogh, at a sale made 
for foreclosure of mortgage by the Citizens' Bank of Louisiana. 
McDonogh left it by will to the cities of New Orleans 
and Baltimore, and the city of New Orleans acquired it in 
full ownership at the partition sale. 

During the latter portion of his life, Allard, who, being 
a poet, was an indifferent business man, crippled in health 
and fortune, was permitted, after the sale, by special agreement, 
to continue his occupation of the place. There he used 
to spend all his days, reclining in an arm-chair under his 
beloved oaks, reading his favorite authors, and dreaming of 
what might have been. He died not long after the sale of 
his property, and, in compliance with his last wish, he lies 
buried in the old place under the very oak where the last 
years of his life had been passed. 


But the fame of the Metaire oaks does not rest upon the 
poetry or scholarly accomplishments of their former pro- 
prietor, nor upon the memory of the philanthropist who be- 
queathed them to the city nor upon the sturdy strength or the 




perennial youth of their green branches; the great interest 
that lingers among them comes from the memories which 
they recall ; it is the witchery of tradition which makes them 
immortal. 

The antithetic lights and shades of their leafy arcades, 
typical of a state of society where tragedy and gaiety walked 
side by side in chivalrous converse, take back our memories 
to a period scarce fifty years remote, when it was an everyday 
 occurrence to see under these very branches a meeting 
of adversaries in mortal combat, with rapier or pistol, sabre 
or shot-gun. 

At that time, New Orleans, though even then to a degree 
cosmopolitan, was essentially a Creole city, and under the full 
influence of the traditions which governed that high-strung 
and chivalrous race. The descendants of the early possess- 
ors of the soil, many of whom were of aristocratic blood, 
had grown up with the more plebian sons of the other settlers, 
and what, with education in common, received in Europe and 
at the College d'Orleans in this city, what with intermarriages, 
the habit of command acquired from the ownership 
of slaves, and the refining influence of well employed leisure, 
formed a sort of aristocracy from which the South derived 
some of its brightest intellects. It was a nobility less of birth 
than of manners, breeding, education and tradition. 

Besides, life was easy in New Orleans at that time, for 
the city was not only a great place of import and export 
from its position near the Gulf, but owing to its river facilities, 
not yet antagonized by the railroads, it controlled with 
scarcely any competition the whole trade of the West. Money 
was therefore acquired without the absorbing and deleterious 
consequences of incessant labor; there was time left to 
merchants and clerks for mental culture, and imagination was not, 
by the nature of things, excluded from the active world. The 
women, bred at home, under a mother's jealous surveillance, 
educated by the best private teachers or at the renowned 
Convent of the Ursuline Nuns, were versed in arts and in 
letters. Invariably treated with the most deferential gallantry 
by the men, none of whom were ever known to smoke or 
otherwise demean themselves in the presence of a lady, they 
had naturally acquired manners of great refinement and 
distinction. The world and society therefore were of courtly 
brilliancy. Merchants and lawyers were incidentally poets 
and wits, and the ladies accomplished musicians. Over all 
this: over men and women, there ruled a supreme sense of 
dignity and honor, maintained by the strictest and most 
unflinching public opinion. At that time bankrupts committed 
suicide, and women fallen from virtue disappeared and were 
never heard from. There was no compromise with honor; 
society did not permit it. 

Under this moral condition of affairs, the punctilio among 
men was strict even to exaggeration. The least breach of  
etiquette, the most venial sin against politeness, the least 
suspicion thrown out of unfair dealing, even a bit of 
awkwardness, were causes sufficient for a cartel, 
which none dared refuse. 

The acceptance, however, did not mean, that the quarrel 
must inevitably be settled on the field. The seconds, two on 
each side, discussed the quarrel dispassionately, sometimes 
with the assistance of mutual friends, and often arrived at an 
amicable and honorable settlement. A blow was strictly 
forbidden, and sufficient to debar the striker from the privilege 
of the duello. A gentleman who would so far forget himself 
as to strike another was exposed to the ignominy of being 
refused a meeting. Some who have so far lost their self-possession 
have been known to submit to the greatest humiliation 
in order to obtain from their adversary an exchange of 
shots or a crossing of swords. Nor was even an insult 
permitted to go beyond a certain decorum of form. Experienced 
friends, well versed in the law and precedents of the code, 
settled beforehand every nice point, so that the adversaries 
met under the oak in full equalitymorally and socially. 

How many a bloody combat originated in a ballroom, 
where the cause of the difficulty passed unnoticed by all! 

Said a gentleman to a much-courted lady, dancing in a 
brilliant ballroom: 

"Honor me with half of this dance?" 

"Ask monsieur," answered the lady, "it belongs to him." 

"Never," spoke the dancer when appealed to, whirling past 
in the waltz, and who had just caught the words softly spoken 
by smiling lips as he passed by. 

"Ah, vous etes mal eleve." 

Not a word more was said that night between the two 
gentlemen, though they subsequently met and bowed; but 
early the next morning the flippant talker received a challenge, 
and in the evening a neat coup droit under the oaks at the 
Metaire. 

So well recognized was the code by all who had any 
pretensions to good breeding, that even judges on the bench 
would resent an insult from lawyers at the bar. A typical 
anecdote of the time is here given : Judge Joachim Bermudez. 
father of the present Chief Justice of the State, while on the 
bench, made a ruling against a certain lawyer, who objected 
in rather unbecoming terms. He was ordered to sit down, 
and refused ; whereupon the judge ordered the sheriff to take 
him into custody for contempt of court. Drawing a pistol, 
the lawyer defied the sheriff, who feared to advance. The 
judge, leaping from his bench, seized the lawyer by the arm 
and handed him to a police officer, who led him to prison. 

The judge soon after ordered his release. 

That evening he received a challenge from the lawyer, 
which was promptly accepted. On the field, the lawyer 
offered to apologize ; but that was forbidden by the code. Never, 
on the field. The judge absolutely refused any apology, and 
the lawyer had to leave the country. He could not have 
practiced, after this, before the courts of the State. 

The oaks of the Metaire, or "Chenes d'Allard," did not 
become a place of rendezvous for duellists until the year 1834. 
Previous to this the favorite place for fighting was the 
Fortin property, now the Fair Grounds. The fact is New Orleans 
being then but sparsely built in the rear, there were a 
number of convenient places close at hand where those who had a 
stoinach for battle could satisfy their cravings to their heart's 
content, without fear of interference. To say the truth, 
interference was the exception. It is true that there existed 
a law against duelHng, but the practice was so strongly welded 
in the customs of the people that the statute served only to 
add the glamour of mystery and the flavor of forbidden fruit 
to the other fascinations of the deadly game, and might as 
well not have existed. 

Things being so, it is not astonishing that New Orleans 
should have been a favorite resort for professors of fence 
or maitres d'armes. Most of these, having no further per- 
sonal value than their skill with the foils, lived in blood, wine, 
and profligacy their circumscribed lives, between the cafes 
and the scdles d'escrime, and even their names are now forever 
forgotten. Others who pursued their calling as an honored 
profession, acquired a certain standing in society, and old 
residents love to talk over their skill in arms and their lovable 
and manly traits. Others, again, have acquired fame for hav- 
ing killed or having been killed in duels. 

Gilbert Rosiere, whose son Gustave, himself an excellent 
swordsman, followed the Gardes d'Orleans to the plain of 
Shiloh at General Beauregard's call, is the maitre d'armes 
who has left the best and certainly the most vivid souvenirs. 
All of us, who were young before the war, remember the gay, 
whole-souled, though irascible fencing master. A native of 
Bordeaux, he had come to New Orleans when a very young 
man, to make his fortune at the bar. But he was of a wild 
disposition and fell in with a wild set ; so he dropped the Code 
Napoleon for the Code of Honor, became a leader in all the 
escapades and devil-may-care adventures of the jeunesse doree 
of that time, and turned fencing master. During the 
Mexican war he earned a fortune, by teaching his art to officers, 
but it was squandered as lightly as made. Brave and generous 
to a fault he was every one's friend, and, contradictory as it 
may seem, this hero of seven duels in one week was, in some 
respects, of womanly tenderness. He would fight with men 
to the bitter death, but would not hurt a defenceless thing, 
woman, child or fly. 

He was passionately fond of music and nervously 
sensitive to its melting impressions. A great frequenter of the 
opera, his superb head could be seen almost every night 
towering above the others in the parquette. On one occasion, 
deeply touched by the pathos of a well-sung cantilena, he 
wept audibly. An imprudent neighbor laughed, but his 
amusement was of short duration, for Rosiere had scarcely 
noticed it than his tenderness turned to anger. 

"C'est vrai," he said, "je pleure, mais je donne aussi des 
callottes." 

By this time the man's face was already slapped, and the 
next day a flesh wound had taught him that it is not always 
good to laugh. Well might Rosiere have exclaimed with the 
old German knight at the close of his career : 

I have lived my life, I have fought my fight, 
I have drunk my share of wine; 
From Trier to Koln there never was knight 
Led a merrier life than mine. 

It was in the spring of 1840. There was a grand assaui 
d'armes between the professors of the old "Salle St. Phillipe," 
which was filled with the gilded youth of old-time New Or- 
leans. None but brevetted experts, who could show a di- 
ploma, were allowed to participate. The valorous Pepe Lulla, 
now famous for a large number of successful duels, then a 
vigorous young man, skilled in the use of weapons, was re- 
fused the privilege of a bout because he had no papers to 
show. 

An Italian professor of counterpoint, named Pulaga, a 
man of magnificent physique and herculean strength, was 
there holding his own with the broadsword, and bidding de- 
fiance to all comers. 

Captain Thimecourt, a former cavalry officer, opposed and 
defeated him. The humiliation was too much for the Italian's 
pride, and he remarked with a sneer that Thimecourt was a 
good tireur de salle. 

"Qu'a cela ne tienne," at once exclaimed the soldier, "let 
us adjourn to the field." 

Without further parley, they took rendezvous for the oaks, 
and there Thimecourt cut his adversary to pieces. 

The following double anecdote is typical of the manners 
and customs of the period : 

Mr. Hughes Pedesclaux was a tall, muscular, and athletic 
young man, whole-souled and popular, but somewhat 
quick-tempered; brave as all of his race, and skilled in the use of 
arms. Mr. Donatien Augustin was a tall, slim young lawyer, 
a great student, fond of his profession, but fond also 
of the military. Both were attached to the "Cannoniers d'Orleans," 
a crack artillery company of those days. Augustin 
had just been made a lieutenant, and was rather proud of his 
uniform and trailing artillery sabre. Parade had just been 
dismissed ; Pedesclaux came up to his friend Augustin, a child 
whom he had spanked and bullied at the College d'Orleans, 
and jovially but irreverently gave a deprecatory kick to the 
swaggering weapon, saying: 

"What could you do with this thing?" 

Quick as a flash came the retort : 

"Follow me a few paces to some quiet place, and I will 
show you!" 

Not a word more was said. Each man picked up two 
friends to act as seconds, and forthwith, followed by the  
delighted crowd, eager for the sight of a scrimmage, marched to 
the scene of combat. 

In those days New Orleans was not extensively built, and 
fighters were not particular about time or place. A 
convenient spot was soon reached, the adversaries doffed their 
uniforms, stripped to their shirt sleeves, and drew their weapons. 
The seconds, after placing them in position, and enjoining 
each to do his duty as a gentleman, uttered the sacramental 
words : 

"Allez, messieurs!" 

And to it they went with a will. Pedesclaux was in the 
full vigor of manhood and skilled in sword-play; Augustin 
was a mere youth, with little experience in arms, but very 
active and willing. As luck would have it, after a few passes, 
he cut his redoubtable adversary in the sword-arm. The 
seconds interfered; there was a great shaking of hands, and 
the incident ended in a gay and plentiful dinner at Victor's. 

Some time afterward, Pedesclaux had a quarrel with a 
retired French cavalry ofHcer. The cartel was passed between 
the two parties with due solemnity, and the Frenchman, 
having the choice of weapons, selected broadswords, on 
horseback. They fought on a plain, in the rear of the second 
district, known as "La Plaine Raquette," on account of the 
peculiar game of ball which used to be played there. 

An eye-witness says: "It was a handsome sight. The 
adversaries were mounted on spirited horses, and stripped to 
the waist. ... A clashing of the steel, which drew sparks 
from the blades, and the two adversaries crossed and passed 
each other by unhurt. In a moment, both horses had been 
vaulted to face each other by the expert riders, and the 
enemies met again. A terrible head blow from the Frenchman 
would now have cleft Pedesclaux to the shoulder-blade, if 
his quick sword had not warded off the death stroke. It was 
then, with lightning rapidity, before his adversary could 
recover his guard, which had been disturbed by the momentum 
of his blow, the Creole, by a rapid half-circle, regained his, 
and with a well directed coup de point plunged his blade 
through the body of the French officer, who reeled in his 
saddle, fell, and was picked up senseless and bleeding by his 
friends. He died soon afterward." 

It would seem that Donatien Augustin, who was later 
in his life judge of one of the district courts, general of the 
Louisiana Legion, and one of the most highly esteemed and 
conservative of our citizens, was lucky in the few duels in 
which the temper of the period caused him to be engaged. 
Two of his adversaries each killed his man in subsequent 
encounters. . . . The following affair, which he had with 
Alexander Grailhe, is told here on account of the interest 
connected with Grailhe's luck in a subsequent encounter. The 
cause of the quarrel is at this day of small concern. Suffice 
it to say that after the insult, or rather provocation, for in 
those days gentlemen rarely insulted, and each was sure that 
a deadly meeting was to follow, the two gentlemen travelled 
in a carriage with ladies, who wondered after the duel, at 
their mutual affability during the trip. 

They met at the oaks. Grailhe, highly bred, and under, 
as he deemed, grevious provocation, as soon as the weapons 
had been crossed, and the impressive "allez, messieurs" had 
been given, lost his temper and furiously charged his 
antagonist. Augustin, cool, collected and agile, parried and evaded 
each savage thrust, till finally by a tevips d'arret judiciously 
interpolated into a terrific lunge of Grailhe, pierced him 
through and through the chest. 

One of the lungs had been perforated. Grailhe remained 
for a long time between life and death, and at last came out 
of his room, but bent forward like an old man. The 
physicians despaired of his life, for an internal abscess, which could 
scarcely be reached, had formed; and it was now for the 
wounded man only a question of time and chance. The latter 
divinity came to his rescue in a most remarkable and original 
manner. 

He quarreled with Colonel Mandeville de Marigny, and 
they met at the oaks. The weapons were pistols at fifteen 
paces, two shots each, advance five paces, and fire at will. 
Grailhe advanced three or four steps, Marigny remaining 
perfectly still, and both fired simultaneously. Grailhe fell, 
pierced through the body, exactly in the place of his former 
and unhealed wound, the ball lodging directly against the 
spinal column. Marigny advanced, pistol in hand, cool as a 
piece of marble, to the utmost limit marked out, when Grailhe, 
who was suffering dire pain, exclaimed: 

"Achevez moi 1" 

Marigny lifted his pistol high above his head and firing 
into the air, said: 

"I never strike a fallen enemy!" 

Grailhe was carried home more a corpse than a living 
man; but, sooth to say, the ball had pierced the smouldering 
abscess that threatened his life, had opened an exit for its 
poisonous accumulations, and the wounded man, some time 
afterward, walked out of his room, as erect and stately as 
ever. Thus for once did the messenger of death bring life 
and health. 

Whatever modernists may say, with great reason, against 
the duello, for it led to many deplorable abuses, there was 
more in the institution than the mere agreement to fight, and 
there was more in it also than in the old relic of barbarism, 
the trial by combat. It was in many instances an 
impediment to bloodshed. Friends quarreled in momentary excitement, 
and instead of seeking personal explanation, which, in 
high-strung people, is impossible under provocation, 
intrusted mutual friends with the demand of satisfaction. If the 
seconds were wise, calm explanation would follow, and the 
trifle was adjusted. The duties of the seconds were of 
paramount importance, for they assumed every responsibility, and 
were answerable for the life or honor of the principals at the 
bar of public opinion. 


The duello, however, had a refining influence, for every 
gentleman was forced to be guarded in his language and 
behavior, as he well knew that bare brutal courage was not 
sufficient to carry him triumphantly through. It is true that a 
gentleman was obliged to fight, but he had to fight well. . . . 
Otherwise he was quickly ostracised, and society sustained all 
who refused to crozz swords or exchange shots with him. 
The code was very strict. You could not fight a man whom 
you could not ask to your house. 

This is not an apology of the duello, which is now out of 
fashion and has even becc le absurd It does not matter 
nowadays if a man fights or not. We have other ways of 
proving ourselves gentlemen. The purpose here is only to 
recall a brilliant, though not altogether faultless epoch of 
Louisiana history, to show what reason our fathers had in 
their madness, and to point the lessons that may be profitably 
gathered by discriminating minds under the leafy shades of 
the oaks. 

